INTRODUCTION TO ASTRONOMY Greg Smye-Rumsby - @gregsmyerumsby HISTORY INTRODUCTION TO ASTRONOMY Greg Smye-Rumsby - @gregsmyerumsby WHAT IS ASTRONOMY? Astronomy is the oldest of the natural sciences, dating back to antiquity, with its origins in the religious, mythological, cosmological, calendrical, and astrological beliefs and practices of pre-history. Vestiges of these are still found in astrology, a discipline long interwoven with public and governmental astronomy, and not completely disentangled from it until a few centuries ago in the Western World. In some cultures, astronomical data was used for astrological prognostication. Strong Nuclear Force The force that holds the nucleus of an atom together The Four Fundamental Forces of Nature Electro-magnetic Force How both moving and stationary charged particles interact (Lorentz Force) Weak Nuclear Force Allows protons to turn into neutrons and vice versa through beta decay Gravity The fundamental interaction which causes mutual attraction between all things with mass or energy Strength = 1Strength = 1/137 Strength = 10 -6 Strength = 6 x 10 -39 ... it drives everything The Firmament Camille Flammarion's - L'atmosphère: météorologie populaire (Paris, 1888) A depiction of a man peering through the Earth's atmosphere as if it were a curtain in order to observe and understand the inner workings of the Universe. Image: Anonymous The Flammarion engraving is a wood engraving by an unknown artist that first appeared in Camille Flammarion's L'atmosphère: météorologie populaire (1888). The image depicts a man crawling under the edge of the sky, depicted as if it were a solid hemisphere, to look at the mysterious Empyrean beyond. The caption underneath the engraving (not shown here) translates to "A medieval missionary tells that he has found the point where heaven and Earth meet..." https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Firmament In biblical cosmology, the firmament is the vast solid dome created by God on the second day to divide the primal sea (called tehom) into upper and lower portions so that the dry land could appear: Then God said, “Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters.” Thus God made the firmament, and divided the waters which were under the firmament from the waters which were above the firmament; and it was so. And God called the firmament Heaven. So the evening and the morning were the second day. The Earth is flat! Really? https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flat_Earth Heraclides Ponticus (Herakleides) c. 390 - c. 310 BC Heraclides proposed that the apparent daily motion of the stars was created by the rotation of the Earth on its axis once a day. This view contradicted the accepted Aristotelian model of the universe, which said that the Earth was fixed and that the stars and planets in their respective spheres might also be fixed. Simplicius says that Heraclides proposed that the irregular movements of the planets can be explained if the Earth moves while the Sun stays still. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heraclides_Ponticus 365.24219 (tropical) 360° in a circle 12/24 hours in a day 60’ (pars minuta prima) 60” (pars minuta secunda) Let’s look at some very common numbers https://pumas.nasa.gov/files/04_21_97_1.pdf https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/experts-time-division-days-hours-minutes/ #:~:text=In%20his%20treatise%20Almagest%20(circa,subdivided%20into%2060%20smaller%20parts. THE DIVISION of the hour into 60 minutes and of the minute into 60 seconds comes from the Babylonians who used a sexagesimal (counting in 60s) system for mathematics and astronomy. They derived their number system from the Sumerians who were using it as early as 3500 BC. The first division, partes minutae primae, or first minute, became known simply as the "minute." The second segmentation, partes minutae secundae, or "second minute," became known as the second. On the summer solstice at local noon in the Ancient Egyptian city of Swenet (Aswan) on the Tropic of Cancer, the sun would appear at the zenith, directly overhead. Eratosthenes knew, from measurement, that in his hometown of Alexandria, the angle of elevation of the sun would be 1/50 of a full circle (7°12') south of the zenith at the same time. Assuming that Alexandria was due north of Swenet he concluded that the distance from Alexandria to Syene must be 1/50 of the total circumference of the earth - 800 km. Eratosthenes of Cyrene c.275-192 His calculations led him to the conclusion that the Earth’s circumference must be about 39,690 km, an error of less than 1%. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eratosthenes There is a German astrolabe that is similar to this one, made in Hamburg in 1608 that may have served as a model. The shape of the pierced disk (rete) is a map of the sky and the arrangement on the back are reminiscent of late-medieval astrolabes; but the form of the stamped Arabic numbers and the letter shapes of the Latin alphabet are clearly not medieval. The rim (mater) consists of a thin plate, without a thickened limb. Three lobes spring from it, with the larger, middle one pierced so that a ring can run through it, which, in turn, holds the suspension ring. The design of the rete is very simple: a straight equinoctial and solstitial bar, with the circles of the ecliptic and the equator. On the back of the instrument is a combined scale for degrees and the zodiac and a calendrical scale. The rest of the back is divided into two halves: the upper half shows the arcs for unequal hours and the lower half contains a shadow square. The Astrolabe https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eratosthenes Ptolemy (85-165 AD) attempted to solve the retrograde motion by suggesting the idea of epicycles. He imagined a small circle (the epicycle) rotating on a large circle (the deferent). Retrograde motion among the stars Asters Planetai - ‘wandering star’ As the epicycle moved round the deferent there would be times when the planet seemed to be moving backwards in the sky. This fitted the observations until slightly more accurate measurements were made and this meant that Ptolemy had to add another epicycle on the first epicycle to get the correct planetary movement. ’Fixed stars’ Mars’ apparent retrograde motion Mars Earth Sun Retrograde motion is an apparent change in the movement of the planet through the sky. It is not REAL in that the planet does not physically start moving backwards in its orbit. It just appears to do so because of the relative positions of the planet and Earth and how they are moving around the Sun. Apparent change in the direction of planets against the fixed background stars Apparent motion against the background sky Actual orbital motion seen from overhead Actual/apparent motions Sun Planet 1 at start Planet 2 at start Claudius Ptolemy c. 100 – c. 170 AD Image: Wikipedia The Ptolemaic system, also called geocentric system or geocentric model, mathematical model of the Universe formulated by the Alexandrian astronomer and mathematician Ptolemy about 150 CE and recorded by him in his Almagest and Planetary Hypotheses. The Ptolemaic system is a geocentric cosmology; that is, it starts by assuming that Earth is stationary and at the centre of the Universe. Mars Saturn Jupiter Sun Earth Moon Mercury Venus Algamest - 148 AD https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geocentric_model In astronomy, the geocentric model (also known as geocentrism, often exemplified specifically by the Ptolemaic system) is a superseded description of the Universe with Earth at the center. Under the geocentric model, the Sun, Moon, stars, and planets all orbited Earth. The geocentric model was the predominant description of the cosmos in many ancient civilizations, such as those of Aristotle in Classical Greece and Ptolemy in Roman Egypt. Two observations supported the idea that Earth was the center of the Universe: First, from anywhere on Earth, the Sun appears to revolve around Earth once per day. While the Moon and the planets have their own motions, they also appear to revolve around Earth about once per day. The stars appeared to be fixed on a celestial sphere rotating once each day about an axis through the geographic poles of Earth. Second, Earth seems to be unmoving from the perspective of an earthbound observer; it feels solid, stable, and stationary. Ancient Greek, ancient Roman, and medieval philosophers usually combined the geocentric model with a spherical Earth, in contrast to the older flat-Earth model implied in some mythology. The ancient Jewish Babylonian uranography pictured a flat Earth with a dome- shaped, rigid canopy called the firmament placed over it. However, the Greek astronomer and mathematician Aristarchus of Samos (c. 310 – c. 230 BC) developed a heliocentric model placing all of the then-known planets in their correct order around the Sun. The ancient Greeks believed that the motions of the planets were circular, a view that was not challenged in Western culture until the 17th century, when Johannes Kepler postulated that orbits were heliocentric and elliptical (Kepler's first law of planetary motion). In 1687 Newton showed that elliptical orbits could be derived from his laws of gravitation. The astronomical predictions of Ptolemy's geocentric model, developed in the 2nd century CE, served as the basis for preparing astrological and astronomical charts for over 1500 years. The geocentric model held sway into the early modern age, but from the late 16th century onward, it was gradually superseded by the heliocentric model of Copernicus (1473-1543), Galileo (1564-1642), and Kepler (1571-1630). There was much resistance to the transition between these two theories. Some felt that a new, unknown theory could not subvert an accepted consensus for geocentrism. Nicolaus Copernicus 1473 – 1543 Copernican Heliocentrism - 1543. Image: Wikipedia This model positioned the Sun at the centre of the Universe, motionless, with Earth and the other planets orbiting around it in circular paths, modified by epicycles, and at uniform speeds. The Copernican model displaced the geocentric model of Ptolemy that had prevailed for centuries, which had placed Earth at the centre of the Universe. Copernican heliocentrism is often regarded as the launching point to modern astronomy. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Copernican_heliocentrism Heliocentric Model Image: Wikipedia Immobile sphere of fixed stars Saturn completes one revolution every 30 years One revolution of Jupiter every 12 years Biannual revolution of Mars Annual revolution of Earth and sphere of Moon Venus every 7 1/2 months Mercury in 88 days Sun - stands still at the centre Kepler's laws are: The orbit of every planet is an ellipse with the Sun at one of the two foci. A line joining a planet and the Sun sweeps out equal areas during equal intervals of time. The square of the orbital period of a planet is directly proportional to the cube of the semi-major axis of its orbit. Johannes Kepler 1561 – 1630 Laws of planetary motion 1 2 3 SEMI-MAJOR AXIS SEMI-MAJOR AXIS https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Johannes_Kepler He hypothesised that the Earth had a curved magnetic field, dipping into each pole and arching across the equator. Dr William Gilbert 1544 – 1603 Geomagnetism Gilbert’s book De Mundo proposed a radical cosmology concluding that the Earth had a daily rotation and that the influence of this rotation extended to the Moon and perhaps beyond into space. In De Mundo he also argued that the stars were at different distances in space. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Gilbert_(physicist) On 30th November 1609 Galileo started observing and sketching the Moon. He was probably not the first person to look at the Moon through a telescope (Thomas Harriot), but Galileo had made himself a telescope that was much better than the others, and he could see the Moon's surface in much more detail. Galileo Galilei 1564 – 1642 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galileo_Galilei The Copernican model Galileo, with his own hand-built telescope of poor quality and low power by today’s standards, was able to observe Venus during its morning and evening apparitions. In doing so revealed that Copernicus was indeed correct. Sun-centred Universe SunVenus https://www.facebook.com/legacy/notes/2060318253984389/ Isaac Newton 1642 – 1727 Planet Planet’s velocity Gravitational pull of the Sun Sun Resultant path (orbit) M m R M 1 x m 2 r 2 = F Newtonian mechanics Universal gravitation Infinitesimal calculus Optics Binomial series Newton's method and Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica - 1687 G Gravitational Constant https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Isaac_Newton Royal Observatory 1675 - 1998 The Royal Observatory, Greenwich is an observatory situated in Greenwich Park overlooking the River Thames. It played a major role in the history of astronomy and navigation, and because the Prime Meridian passed through it, it gave its name to Greenwich Mean Time. The observatory was commissioned in 1675 by King Charles II, with the foundation stone being laid on 10 August. The old hilltop site of Greenwich Castle was chosen by Sir Christopher Wren as Greenwich Park was a royal estate. John Flamsteed was the first Astronomer Royal. The building was completed in the summer of 1676. The building was often called "Flamsteed House", in reference to its first occupant. On Saint Helena, Halley recorded a transit of Mercury across the Sun. He realised a similar transit of Venus could be used to determine the size of the Solar System. He also used his observations to expand contemporary star maps. He helped in observationally proving Isaac Newton's laws of motion, and funded the publication of Newton's influential Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica. He used the laws of motion to compute the periodicity of Halley's Comet in his 1705 Synopsis of the Astronomy of Comets. It was named after him upon its predicted return in 1758, which he did not live to see. Edmond Halley 1656 – 1742 2nd Astronomer Royal Halley's Comet https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edmond_Halley Edmond[1] (or Edmund[2]) Halley, FRS (/ˈhæli/;[3][4] 8 November [O.S. 29 October] 1656 – 25 January 1742 [O.S. 14 January 1742]) was an English astronomer, geophysicist, mathematician, meteorologist, and physicist. He was the second Astronomer Royal in Britain, succeeding John Flamsteed in 1720.[5] From an observatory he constructed on Saint Helena,[6] Halley recorded a transit of Mercury across the Sun. He realised a similar transit of Venus could be used to determine the size of the Solar System.[7] He also used his observations to expand contemporary star maps. He aided in observationally proving Isaac Newton's laws of motion, and funded the publication of Newton's influential Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica.[8] From his September 1682 observations, he used the laws of motion to compute the periodicity of Halley's Comet in his 1705 Synopsis of the Astronomy of Comets.[9][10] It was named after him upon its predicted return in 1758, which he did not live to see. Beginning in 1698, he made sailing expeditions and made observations on the conditions of terrestrial magnetism. In 1718, he discovered the proper motion of the "fixed" stars.[8] Messier's occupation as a comet hunter led him to continually come across fixed diffuse objects in the night sky which could be mistaken for comets. He compiled a list of them in collaboration with his friend and assistant Pierre Méchain (who may have found at least 20 of the objects), to avoid wasting time sorting them out from the comets they were looking for. The entries are now known to be 39 galaxies, 4 planetary nebulae, 7 other types of nebulae, and 55 star clusters. Charles Messier 1730 – 1817 Mapping the sky’s faint diffuse objects https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_Messier Charles Messier (French: [ʃaʁl me.sje]; 26 June 1730 – 12 April 1817) was a French astronomer. He published an astronomical catalogue consisting of 110 nebulae and faint star clusters, which came to be known as the Messier objects. The purpose of the catalogue was to help astronomical observers distinguish between permanent and transient visually diffuse objects in the sky. Messier was born in Badonviller in the Lorraine region of France, the tenth of twelve children of Françoise B. Grandblaise and Nicolas Messier, a Court usher. Six of his brothers and sisters died while young, and his father died in 1741. Charles' interest in astronomy was stimulated by the appearance of the great six-tailed comet in 1744 and by an annular solar eclipse visible from his hometown on 25 July 1748. In 1751, Messier entered the employ of Joseph Nicolas Delisle, the astronomer of the French Navy, who instructed him to keep careful records of his observations. Messier's first documented observation was that of the Mercury transit of 6 May 1753, followed by his observations journals at Cluny Hotel and at the French Navy observatories. In 1764, Messier was made a fellow of the Royal Society; in 1769, he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences; and on 30 June 1770, he was elected to the French Academy of Sciences. On 13th March 1781 while making observations he made a note of a new object in the constellation of Gemini. This would, after several weeks of verification and consultation with other astronomers, be confirmed as a new planet, eventually given the name of Uranus. This was the first planet to be discovered. As a result of this George III appointed him Court Astronomer. He was elected as a Fellow of the Royal Society and grants were provided for the construction of new telescopes. William Herschel 1738 – 1822 Discoverer of Uranus Pioneer in Spectrophotometry Infrared radiation https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Herschel Frederick William Herschel[1] KH, FRS German (15 November 1738 – 25 August 1822) was a German-born British astronomer and composer of music. He frequently collaborated with his younger sister and fellow astronomer Caroline Lucretia Herschel (1750–1848). Born in the Electorate of Hanover, William Herschel followed his father into the military band of Hanover, before emigrating to Great Britain in 1757 at the age of nineteen. Herschel constructed his first large telescope in 1774, after which he spent nine years carrying out sky surveys to investigate double stars. Herschel published catalogues of nebulae in 1802 (2,500 objects) and in 1820 (5,000 objects). The resolving power of the Herschel telescopes revealed that many objects called nebulae in the Messier catalogue were actually clusters of stars. On 13 March 1781 while making observations he made note of a new object in the constellation of Gemini. This would, after several weeks of verification and consultation with other astronomers, be confirmed to be a new planet, eventually given the name of Uranus. This was the first planet to be discovered since antiquity, and Herschel became famous overnight. As a result of this discovery, George III appointed him Court Astronomer. He was elected as a Fellow of the Royal Society and grants were provided for the construction of new telescopes. Herschel pioneered the use of astronomical spectrophotometry, using prisms and temperature measuring equipment to measure the wavelength distribution of stellar spectra. In the course of these investigations, Herschel discovered infrared radiation. Other work included an improved determination of the rotation period of Mars, the discovery that the Martian polar caps vary seasonally, the discovery of Titania and Oberon (moons of Uranus) and Enceladus and Mimas (moons of Saturn). Herschel was made a Knight of the Royal Guelphic Order in 1816. He was the first President of the Royal Astronomical Society when it was founded in 1820. He died in August 1822, and his work was continued by his only son, John Herschel. Dolland’s success came in 1758 when he became the first person to patent the ‘achromatic lens’. Sir Isaac Newton had tried in vain to develop a lens which wasn’t blighted by spurious colours, but had eventually declared that it was impossible. John Dolland Chromatic aberration - solved https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Dollond A Bavarian physicist and optical lens manufacturer. He made optical glass and achromatic telescope objective lenses, invented the spectroscope and developed the diffraction grating. In 1814, he discovered and studied the dark absorption lines in the spectrum of the Sun now known as Fraunhofer lines. Joseph von Fraunhoferr 1787 – 1826 Solar spectrum Image: "Essays in astronomy" D. Appleton & company, 1900 OXYGEN SODIUM HELIUM HYDROGEN OXYGEN OXYGEN MERCURY IRON IRON IRON IRON IRON IRON CALCIUM HYDROGEN HYDROGEN https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ Joseph_von_Fraunhofer#:~:text=By%201814%2C%20Fraunhofer%20had%20invented,of%20refraction%20in%20different%20substan ces. Joseph Ritter von Fraunhofer (6 March 1787 – 7 June 1826) was a Bavarian physicist and optical lens manufacturer. He made optical glass and achromatic telescope objective lenses, invented the spectroscope, and developed diffraction grating. In 1814, he discovered and studied the dark absorption lines in the spectrum of the sun now known as Fraunhofer lines. The German research organisation Fraunhofer Society is named after him and is Europe's biggest Society for the Advancement of Applied Research. He was the first astronomer who determined reliable values for the distance from the sun to another star by the method of parallax. A special type of mathematical functions were named Bessel functions after Bessel's death, though they had originally been discovered by Daniel Bernoulli and then generalised by Bessel. Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel 1784 – 1846 Stellar distances Sun Earth Position at start Earth Six months later Star position at start Star position six months later Nearby star Nearby stars P Image: NASA/New Horizons 2020 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Friedrich_Bessel Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel (German: [ˈbɛsl ̩ ]; 22 July 1784 – 17 March 1846) was a German astronomer, mathematician, physicist and geodesist. He was the first astronomer who determined reliable values for the distance from the sun to another star by the method of parallax. A special type of mathematical functions were named Bessel functions after Bessel's death, though they had originally been discovered by Daniel Bernoulli and then generalised by Bessel. The planet Neptune – now considered by most astronomers to be the outermost major planet in our Solar System – was discovered on 23rd September 1846 using mathematics. Johann Gottfried Galle, Urbain Jean Joseph Le Verrier, and John Couch Adams along with James Challis all worked independently to help discover this world in 1846. Johann Galle German 1812 – 1910 John Couch Adams English 1819 – 1892 Urbain Le Verrier French 1561 – 1730 DISCOVERY OF NEPTUNE https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Discovery_of_Neptune James Challis Albert Einstein was a German-born theoretical physicist, widely acknowledged to be one of the greatest and most influential physicists of all time. Einstein is best known for developing the Theory of Relativity in 1905, but he also made important contributions to the development of the theory of quantum mechanics. Albert Einstein 1879 – 1955 Theoretical physicist https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Albert_Einstein Hermann Minkowski was a German mathematician and professor at Königsberg, Zürich and Göttingen. He created and developed the geometry of numbers and used geometrical methods to solve problems in number theory, mathematical physics, and the theory of relativity and a more complete understanding of SpaceTime. Hermann Minkowski 1864 – 1909 German mathematician and professor https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hermann_Minkowski She worked at the Harvard College Observatory as a "computer", tasked with examining photographic plates in order to measure and catalog the brightness of stars. In 1908 this work led her to discover the relation between the luminosity and the period of Cepheid variables. Leavitt's discovery provided astronomers with the first "standard candle" with which to measure the distance to faraway galaxies. Parallax method = 100lr Cepheid stars = 20mly Henrietta Swan Leavitt 1868 – 1921 American astronomer & ‘computer’ https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Henrietta_Swan_Leavitt Day 5 Cepheid Variables - the first ‘standard’ candles DURATION Day 10Day 15 LUMINOCITY When a cepheid’s outer layer expands it becomes less dense allowing more light from the star to escape. As the outer helium layer contracts it becomes more dense and the star becomes less bright. Cepheid variables are about 30 thousand times brighter than the Sun And some 5 - 20 times more massive. Day 0 Same maximum brightness as other Cepheid variable https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cepheid_variable He was the first to theorise that the recession of nearby galaxies can be explained by an expanding universe, which was observationally confirmed soon afterwards by Edwin Hubble. He first derived "Hubble's law", now called the Hubble–Lemaître law by the IAU, and published the first estimation of the Hubble constant in 1927, two years before Hubble's article. Lemaître also proposed the "Big Bang theory" of the origin of the universe, calling it the "hypothesis of the primeval atom”, and later calling it "the beginning of the world" Georges Lemaître 1894 – 1966 Theoretical physicist, mathematician, astronomer Schwarzschild provided the first exact solution to the Einstein field equations of general relativity, for the limited case of a single spherical non-rotating mass, which he accomplished in 1915, the same year that Einstein first introduced General Relativity. The Schwarzschild solution, which makes use of Schwarzschild coordinates and the Schwarzschild metric, leads to a derivation of the Schwarzschild radius, which is the size of the event horizon of a non-rotating black hole. Schwarzschild accomplished this while serving in the German army during World War I. He died the following year from the autoimmune disease pemphigus, which he developed while at the Russian front. Various forms of the disease particularly affect people of Ashkenazi Jewish origin. Karl Schwarzschild 1873 – 1916 German physicist and astronomer https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karl_Schwarzschild Hubble proved that many objects previously thought to be clouds of dust and gas and classified as "nebulae" were actually galaxies beyond the Milky Way. He used the strong direct relationship between a classical Cepheid variable’s luminosity and pulsation period for scaling galactic and extragalactic distances. Hubble provided evidence that the recessional velocity of a galaxy increases with its distance from the Earth, a property now known as "Hubble's law", despite the fact that it had been both proposed and demonstrated observationally two years earlier by Georges Lemaître. The Hubble–Lemaître law implies that the universe is expanding. Edwin Hubble 1889 – 1953 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edwin_Hubble Chandrasekhar worked on a wide variety of physical problems in his lifetime. He developed a theoretical model explaining the structure of white dwarf stars that took into account the relativistic variation of mass with the velocities of electrons that comprise their degenerate matter. He showed that the mass of a white dwarf could not exceed 1.44 times that of the Sun – the Chandrasekhar limit. Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar 1910 – 1995 Indian -American Astrophysicist https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subrahmanyan_Chandrasekhar The CMB is electromagnetic radiation which is a remnant from an early stage of the Universe, also known as "relic radiation". The CMB is faint cosmic background radiation filling all space. With a traditional optical telescope, the space between stars and galaxies is completely dark. However, a sufficiently sensitive radio telescope shows a faint background noise, or glow, almost isotropic, that is not associated with any star, galaxy, or other object. This glow is strongest in the microwave region of the radio spectrum. Arno Penzias Robert Wilson Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cosmic_microwave_background The Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB, CMBR), in Big Bang cosmology, is electromagnetic radiation which is a remnant from an early stage of the universe, also known as "relic radiation"[citation needed]. The CMB is faint cosmic background radiation filling all space. It is an important source of data on the early universe because it is the oldest electromagnetic radiation in the universe, dating to the epoch of recombination. With a traditional optical telescope, the space between stars and galaxies (the background) is completely dark. However, a sufficiently sensitive radio telescope shows a faint background noise, or glow, almost isotropic, that is not associated with any star, galaxy, or other object. This glow is strongest in the microwave region of the radio spectrum. The accidental discovery of the CMB in 1965 by American radio astronomers Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson[1][2] was the culmination of work initiated in the 1940s, and earned the discoverers the 1978 Nobel Prize in Physics. CMB is landmark evidence of the Big Bang origin of the universe. When the universe was young, before the formation of stars and planets, it was denser, much hotter, and filled with a uniform glow from a white-hot fog of hydrogen plasma. As the universe expanded, both the plasma and the radiation filling it grew cooler. When the universe cooled enough, protons and electrons combined to form neutral hydrogen atoms. Unlike the uncombined protons and electrons, these newly conceived atoms could not scatter the thermal radiation by Thomson scattering, and so the universe became transparent instead of being an opaque fog.[3] Cosmologists refer to the time period when neutral atoms first formed as the recombination epoch, and the event shortly afterwards when photons started to travel freely through space rather than constantly being scattered by electrons and protons in plasma is referred to as photon decoupling. The photons that existed at the time of photon decoupling have been propagating ever since, though growing fainter and less energetic, since the expansion of space causes their wavelength to increase over time (and wavelength is inversely proportional to energy according to Planck's relation). This is the source of the alternative term relic radiation. The surface of last scattering refers to the set of points in space at the right distance from us so that we are now receiving photons originally emitted from those points at the time of photon decoupling. Sir Fred Hoyle FRS was an English astronomer who formulated the theory of stellar nucleosynthesis and was one of the authors of the influential ‘Synthesis of the Elements in Stars’ paper. He is credited with coining the term "Big Bang" during a talk for a March 1949 BBC Radio broadcast, saying: "These theories were based on the hypothesis that all the matter in the universe was created in one big bang at a particular time in the remote past." Fred Hoyle 1915 – 2001 Astronomer & theoretical physicist https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fred_Hoyle Ernest Rutherford, 1st Baron Rutherford of Nelson, OM, PRS, HonFRSE was a New Zealand physicist who was a pioneering researcher in both atomic and nuclear physics. Rutherford has been described as "the father of nuclear physics", and "the greatest experimentalist since Michael Faraday". Ernest Rutherford's most famous experiment is the gold foil experiment. A beam of alpha particles was aimed at a piece of gold foil. Most alpha particles passed through the foil, but a few were scattered backward. This showed that most of the atom is empty space surrounding a tiny nucleus. Ernest Rutherford 1871 – 1937 Theoretical physicist https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ernest_Rutherford https://www.newscientist.com/article/2328087-can-particles-really-be-in-two-places-at-the-same-time/ #:~:text=The%20only%20way%20we%20can,and%20one%20through%20the%20right. His best known scientific contribution is research on extraterrestrial life, including experimental demonstration of the production of amino acids from basic chemicals by radiation. Sagan assembled the first physical messages sent into space, the Pioneer plaque and the Voyager Golden Record, universal messages that could potentially be understood by any extraterrestrial intelligence that might find them. Sagan argued the hypothesis, accepted since, that the high surface temperatures of Venus can be attributed to, and calculated using, the greenhouse effect. Prof Carl Edward Sagan 1934 – 1996 American astronomer, planetary scientist, cosmologist, astrophysicist, astrobiologist https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carl_Sagan Stephen William Hawking was an English theoretical physicist, cosmologist, and author who, at the time of his death, was director of research at the Centre for Theoretical Cosmology at the University of Cambridge. Stephen Hawking 1942 – 2018 Theoretical physicist https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stephen_Hawking The first pulsar was observed on November 28, 1967, by Jocelyn Bell Burnell and Antony Hewish. They observed pulses separated by 1.33 seconds that originated from the same location in the sky, and kept to sidereal time. In looking for explanations for the pulses, the short period of the pulses eliminated most astrophysical sources of radiation, such as stars, and since the pulses followed sidereal time, it could not be human-made radio frequency interference. Discovery of Pulsars Jocelyn Bell Burnell 1943 Astrophysicist https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pulsar#:~:text=Cambridge%20University%20Library-,Discovery,and%20kept%20to%20sidereal%20time. The first pulsar was observed on November 28, 1967, by Jocelyn Bell Burnell and Antony Hewish.[4][5][6] They observed pulses separated by 1.33 seconds that originated from the same location in the sky, and kept to sidereal time. In looking for explanations for the pulses, the short period of the pulses eliminated most astrophysical sources of radiation, such as stars, and since the pulses followed sidereal time, it could not be human-made radio frequency interference. When observations with another telescope confirmed the emission, it eliminated any sort of instrumental effects. At this point, Bell Burnell said of herself and Hewish that "we did not really believe that we had picked up signals from another civilization, but obviously the idea had crossed our minds and we had no proof that it was an entirely natural radio emission. It is an interesting problem—if one thinks one may have detected life elsewhere in the universe, how does one announce the results responsibly?"[7] Even so, they nicknamed the signal LGM-1, for "little green men" (a playful name for intelligent beings of extraterrestrial origin). INTRODUCTION TO ASTRONOMY Greg Smye-Rumsby - @gregsmyerumsby