INTRODUCTION TO ASTRONOMY Greg Smye-Rumsby - @gregsmyerumsby HISTORY INTRODUCTION TO ASTRONOMY Greg Smye-Rumsby - @gregsmyerumsby WHAT IS ASTRONOMY? Astronomy is the oldest of the natural sciences, dating back to antiquity, with its origins in the religious, mythological, cosmological, calendrical, and astrological beliefs and practices of pre-history. Vestiges of these are still found in astrology, a discipline long interwoven with public and governmental astronomy, and not completely disentangled from it until a few centuries ago in the Western World. In some cultures, astronomical data was used for astrological prognostication. Strong Nuclear Force The force that holds the nucleus of an atom together The Four Fundamental Forces of Nature Electro-magnetic Force How both moving and stationary charged particles interact (Lorentz Force) Weak Nuclear Force Allows protons to turn into neutrons and vice versa through beta decay Gravity The fundamental interaction which causes mutual attraction between all things with mass or energy Strength = 1Strength = 1/137 Strength = 10 -6 Strength = 6 x 10 -39 ... it drives everything The Firmament Camille Flammarion's - L'atmosphère: météorologie populaire (Paris, 1888) A depiction of a man peering through the Earth's atmosphere as if it were a curtain in order to observe and understand the inner workings of the Universe. Image: Anonymous The Flammarion engraving is a wood engraving by an unknown artist that first appeared in Camille Flammarion's L'atmosphère: météorologie populaire (1888). The image depicts a man crawling under the edge of the sky, depicted as if it were a solid hemisphere, to look at the mysterious Empyrean beyond. The caption underneath the engraving (not shown here) translates to "A medieval missionary tells that he has found the point where heaven and Earth meet..." https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Firmament In biblical cosmology, the firmament is the vast solid dome created by God on the second day to divide the primal sea (called tehom) into upper and lower portions so that the dry land could appear: Then God said, “Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters.” Thus God made the firmament, and divided the waters which were under the firmament from the waters which were above the firmament; and it was so. And God called the firmament Heaven. So the evening and the morning were the second day. The Earth is flat! Really? https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flat_Earth Heraclides Ponticus (Herakleides) c. 390 - c. 310 BC Heraclides proposed that the apparent daily motion of the stars was created by the rotation of the Earth on its axis once a day. This view contradicted the accepted Aristotelian model of the universe, which said that the Earth was fixed and that the stars and planets in their respective spheres might also be fixed. Simplicius says that Heraclides proposed that the irregular movements of the planets can be explained if the Earth moves while the Sun stays still. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heraclides_Ponticus 365.24219 (tropical) 360° in a circle 12/24 hours in a day 60’ (pars minuta prima) 60” (pars minuta secunda) Let’s look at some very common numbers https://pumas.nasa.gov/files/04_21_97_1.pdf https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/experts-time-division-days-hours-minutes/ #:~:text=In%20his%20treatise%20Almagest%20(circa,subdivided%20into%2060%20smaller%20parts. THE DIVISION of the hour into 60 minutes and of the minute into 60 seconds comes from the Babylonians who used a sexagesimal (counting in 60s) system for mathematics and astronomy. They derived their number system from the Sumerians who were using it as early as 3500 BC. The first division, partes minutae primae, or first minute, became known simply as the "minute." The second segmentation, partes minutae secundae, or "second minute," became known as the second. On the summer solstice at local noon in the Ancient Egyptian city of Swenet (Aswan) on the Tropic of Cancer, the sun would appear at the zenith, directly overhead. Eratosthenes knew, from measurement, that in his hometown of Alexandria, the angle of elevation of the sun would be 1/50 of a full circle (7°12') south of the zenith at the same time. Assuming that Alexandria was due north of Swenet he concluded that the distance from Alexandria to Syene must be 1/50 of the total circumference of the earth - 800 km. Eratosthenes of Cyrene c.275-192 His calculations led him to the conclusion that the Earth’s circumference must be about 39,690 km, an error of less than 1%. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eratosthenes There is a German astrolabe that is similar to this one, made in Hamburg in 1608 that may have served as a model. The shape of the pierced disk (rete) is a map of the sky and the arrangement on the back are reminiscent of late-medieval astrolabes; but the form of the stamped Arabic numbers and the letter shapes of the Latin alphabet are clearly not medieval. The rim (mater) consists of a thin plate, without a thickened limb. Three lobes spring from it, with the larger, middle one pierced so that a ring can run through it, which, in turn, holds the suspension ring. The design of the rete is very simple: a straight equinoctial and solstitial bar, with the circles of the ecliptic and the equator. On the back of the instrument is a combined scale for degrees and the zodiac and a calendrical scale. The rest of the back is divided into two halves: the upper half shows the arcs for unequal hours and the lower half contains a shadow square. The Astrolabe https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eratosthenes